David Schaich (he): Well, it's probably time to get underway
David Schaich (he): on Monday morning, the 24th of April.  And the code that just went
David Schaich (he): on the board is 6, 6, 3, 2, 8, 6.
David Schaich (he): As a
David Schaich (he): brief logistical remark to get underway, this will be
David Schaich (he): the last Monday morning lecture for a couple of weeks.
David Schaich (he): We have bank holidays next week, the first of May,
David Schaich (he): and then the following week the eighth of May.
David Schaich (he): We have one of those lectures rescheduled to that reading week, the 15th of May.  The other I'll make up
with
David Schaich (he): some recorded pencasts
David Schaich (he): in the time up till then.
David Schaich (he): Yeah.
David Schaich (he): we'll have it somewhat
David Schaich (he): truncated schedule the next couple of weeks. It's based on that.
David Schaich (he): Hopefully, we will not
David Schaich (he): make it more challenging to
David Schaich (he): bye next Wednesday.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): if there are immediate questions about what we've got up to last week. this is a time to bring them up.
David Schaich (he): and while you think about that? We just
David Schaich (he): the quick recaps remind ourselves where we are and where we are headed.
David Schaich (he): We have them looking at ideal quantum gases as a venue for applications. It's the grand canonical ensemble
David Schaich (he): that allows both particle, number and energy to fluctuate by exchange with an external particle Reservoir I interact exchanging energy and particles
David Schaich (he): with our system
David Schaich (he): and the quantum gases
David Schaich (he): we're looking at our first of all ideal. They involve non interacting particles for waves that just passed straight through each other and Don't
David Schaich (he): interact. and they are based on quantum statistics of 2 different types. The Go design assign a statistics of Bosons which led us to the showtime gas of
David Schaich (he): all the relativistic, massless bosons that we looked at last week driving
David Schaich (he): energy density as a function of frequency. Or
I guess
David Schaich (he): let me see. like spectrum. We so provided a good description of photons ranging from
David Schaich (he): high temperature stars to the cool temperature, cosmic, microwave background, despite neglecting
David Schaich (he): all of the interactions that actually give rise to the photons. And then there was systems
David Schaich (he): we found, with the equation stage for leading
David Schaich (he): the large scale quantities of the system, pressure, rolling, temperature and number density.
David Schaich (he): and the familiar form. the same functional form as the ideal gas law
David Schaich (he): back from before the break.
David Schaich (he): just with
David Schaich (he): some
David Schaich (he): a slightly different constant factor.
David Schaich (he): We can boiled down to me a ratio of the functions
David Schaich (he): involving and the purely irrational.
David Schaich (he): We said, Why is this problem
David Schaich (he): the effects of relativity as well as the on the nature of that gas, and we wrapped up last Tuesday, and just by beginning
David Schaich (he): a similar look at
David Schaich (he): for me on gas is now with and non-relativistic
David Schaich (he): definition of the energy momentum squared over twice the masses from the ons
David Schaich (he): and we got up to
David Schaich (he): was
David Schaich (he): an expression for the grand canonical potential
David Schaich (he): which
David Schaich (he): now it involves. The mass of these particles, and
David Schaich (he): as well as
David Schaich (he): different combinations of the same
David Schaich (he): sorts of factors.
David Schaich (he): The volume and temperature of the system that we saw for the over the energy of the particles.
David Schaich (he): It's strictly positive. Okay.
David Schaich (he): logarithmic factor.
David Schaich (he): Actually, the square root of the energy you
David Schaich (he): and the
David Schaich (he): chemical potential in here that
David Schaich (he): we were able to justify setting to 0 for a photon gas. It's based on yeah
David Schaich (he): number of to be easy to change that much change in the energy that's no longer the case for these non-relativistic for me, on which
David Schaich (he): makes the analysis more complicated. Our economical potential is now a function of the 2 variables t inverse to use Beta as well as that chemical potential.
David Schaich (he): So we're going to want some other simplification to
David Schaich (he): really good. To grip on this in a similar way.
David Schaich (he): plan for today is to
David Schaich (he): push through a similar computation of the equation of state
David Schaich (he): for the normal, optimistic for me on the Us. Considering specifically
David Schaich (he): the regime of low temperatures.
David Schaich (he): we will see how that helps simplify this analysis
David Schaich (he): equation of state. I'll just pride to Eos. and then that will probably not take us the full time.
David Schaich (he): and if we have some space in the end.
David Schaich (he): no jump straight into
David Schaich (he): interacting systems. the you
David Schaich (he): last main topic of the module.
David Schaich (he): So a quick check to see if that recap inspired any questions, or they came to mind while I was going through it.
David Schaich (he): and the
David Schaich (he): let's move on to that promised
David Schaich (he): simplification from working
David Schaich (he): your temperature Minutes of these non-ultivistic for me on gases which is easiest to see by
David Schaich (he): considering one of those thermodynamic quantities that go into the equation of state.
David Schaich (he): Look specifically at the number density of the For me. It's pretty good to volume.
David Schaich (he): which, coming from our usual
David Schaich (he): very economical identities, is the derivative of great economical potential. With respect to the chemical potential it's actually. the systems volume just comes along, for the ride
David Schaich (he): cancels out the overall factor of B. Negative signs also cancel.
David Schaich (he): We have the constant factor out front
David Schaich (he): integral over energies of the derivative of the log. It's an argument, one
David Schaich (he): plus the exponential factor. down into the denominator.
David Schaich (he): And then we change all that.
David Schaich (he): taking the derivative of
David Schaich (he): that arguing with respect to you. we have the exponential factor. Now, with a How's your assignment?
David Schaich (he): And then the new derivative of theta times, e minus mu. thanks as long. Another positive factor of Beta yes.
David Schaich (he): cancels out the temperature.
David Schaich (he): I forgot to right now. at the very start of that equation.
David Schaich (he): So in the usual way, like we did for the photon. Yes, we can rearrange this by cancelling out, and you know, or dividing through an overall factor of
David Schaich (he): you to the plus data. I'm. C. Minus you.
David Schaich (he): That just gives us
David Schaich (he): it one over that exponential factor.
David Schaich (he): plus one
David Schaich (he): that should be working down
David Schaich (he): the square root of the de at the end of this.
David Schaich (he): which we can define to be the same way, or a similar way that we did for the
David Schaich (he): like spectrum. When we work with the energy density of the photon gas.
David Schaich (he): some function of the times, that square root, he to E.
David Schaich (he): And this function it is known as the
David Schaich (he): Jeremy direct, or what i'll just call the jeremy function derivative
David Schaich (he): alliteration.
David Schaich (he): It differs from the planck spectrum for the photon energy density by omitting that
David Schaich (he): constant pre-factor that involves.
David Schaich (he): And the reason that is admitted is just to Nick
David Schaich (he): function that we can just read off from those 2 lines.
David Schaich (he): look
David Schaich (he): more like the
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): average number of fermions. correct
David Schaich (he): energy levels of the average occupation number
David Schaich (he): one of those energy levels.
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): Mike. the energy levels that we've seen, or the occupation numbers that we've seen for for me, on the energy levels. This is going to range between 0 and one
David Schaich (he): 0 away. Yeah. energy level is always unoccupied on average, one that is always occupied in the For you
David Schaich (he): make the assumption that the chemical potential is greater than 0,
David Schaich (he): like the energy.
David Schaich (he): Then we can see something interesting happening when the energy is equal to the chemical potential. E equals Mu.
David Schaich (he): The argument to the exponential cancels out. We just get e to the 0 is one one over one.
This one
David Schaich (he): is it half all right.
David Schaich (he): halfway in between those 2 limits of 0 and one so at
David Schaich (he): very function is simply a half.
David Schaich (he): We all been on use of the temperature. I'm calling this threshold because we will have different behavior where he
David Schaich (he): is greater than you versus
David Schaich (he): in those 2 cases the sign of the argument to the exponential will change. So when he is greater than we. We have the exponential of hey positive number.
David Schaich (he): and as that difference, e minus U gets larger, exponential, becomes larger and larger in the denominator function overall is exponentially
David Schaich (he): excellent. Eventually suppressed. heading toward
David Schaich (he): that
David Schaich (he): 0 limit. and when e is less than mu correspondingly we have a negative number.
David Schaich (he): It's similar
David Schaich (he): exponential approach
David Schaich (he): to the opposite limit.
David Schaich (he): Every function, heading towards maximum value of.
David Schaich (he): and the other roofing piece or moving parts. In the pyramid function is Beta, the inverse temperature
David Schaich (he): which has the effect of controlling how quickly these 2 limits
David Schaich (he): are reached
David Schaich (he): as
David Schaich (he): the energy and temperature vary. So what we can do to see this more clearly is rearrange the family function to be expressed in terms of
David Schaich (he): dimensionless ratios. So if we pull out in the exponential factor
David Schaich (he): at overall. mu divided by.
David Schaich (he): we need to cancel out that, mute in the interview terms, we have the ratio of energy
David Schaich (he): over mute minus one
David Schaich (he): plus. One comes along with the ride.
David Schaich (he): and we can use
David Schaich (he): the usual
David Schaich (he): exponential identities to
David Schaich (he): right the exponential of the product is one of those exponentials raised to the power of the other.
David Schaich (he): So this
David Schaich (he): they make it easier to see, have those limits of exponential suppression and exponentially approaching the maximum value are realised.
David Schaich (he): And also.
David Schaich (he): should it smaller values of it
David Schaich (he): T. Over Mu, the temperature and units of chemical potential will lead to a larger power. Multiplying this exponential factor that is either
David Schaich (he): exactly one at that threshold
David Schaich (he): greater than one
David Schaich (he): above the threshold, less than one below the threshold
David Schaich (he): where your power is then going to enhance values that you're greater than one
David Schaich (he): extra approach to these that some topic limits
David Schaich (he): just to
David Schaich (he): make it easier to
David Schaich (he): remember. It's a picture we can put up
David Schaich (he): that fits in the screen with no need to zoom at this point.
David Schaich (he): So I've taken that fermi function that we derive. We just plug it
David Schaich (he): as a function of that ratio energy over chemical potential. I'm: just to mention this in our units 4 4 different values of
David Schaich (he): the ratio of temperature
David Schaich (he): to chemical potential. So
David Schaich (he): you over mute.
David Schaich (he): equal to
David Schaich (he): one for the solid red line that's sort of the
David Schaich (he): slightest, and
David Schaich (he): giving the you
David Schaich (he): taking the longest to go between 0 and one.
Thank you.
David Schaich (he): Ultimate minutes that we looked at, as well as to 10,
100 is the
David Schaich (he): to green blue
David Schaich (he): it eventually lacks. So it's. The temperature decreases in terms of the chemical potential.
David Schaich (he): like her of skit steeper and steeper around that threshold
David Schaich (he): where energy is equal to you. and the function is always equal to
David Schaich (he): precisely one half.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): in this low temperature limit.
David Schaich (he): We can see you from this. Not only this is verify it. The conclusions we were drawing just based on
David Schaich (he): looking at the equation and thinking about it's limits, and how it approaches over limits.
David Schaich (he): we can see that we have approximately the formation of the step function in that low temperature limits as t goes to 0,
David Schaich (he): you will always have a function of one half by that e equals new at any point to public that reach up immediately
David Schaich (he): down to
David Schaich (he): 0 from the friendly function below it
David Schaich (he): we jump up to one. So we're low temperature approximation that
David Schaich (he): is going to
David Schaich (he): simplify
David Schaich (he): our calculations in this low temperature regime
David Schaich (he): is just to
David Schaich (he): replace the fiery function
David Schaich (he): in our calculations.
David Schaich (he): And yes, your step function.
David Schaich (he): which is to say.
David Schaich (he): set F of the approximately equal to Why not
David Schaich (he): whenever he is less than you.
David Schaich (he): Otherwise it is 0. So now, if we look back to the expression we had for the number density.
David Schaich (he): are you writing.
David Schaich (he): If you roll over energy with the fermi function in the square root. LED.
David Schaich (he): If we put in this approximation.
David Schaich (he): and the f of the is 0 and kills off all this in tool of E equals to mu
David Schaich (he): what is what he is below you if he is just one and
David Schaich (he): the rest of the control.
David Schaich (he): So we can just
David Schaich (he): replace the upper limit of integration from infinity to the chemical potential view.
David Schaich (he): The integral itself is something we know how to do a square root of E.
David Schaich (he): So let's go ahead and do that
David Schaich (he): the square root
David Schaich (he): when integrated, kicks up to a three-halves power.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): to remain consistent with the derivative we have the universe of that hour
David Schaich (he): coming along as a constant factor. It's evaluated from 0 to M. So we get.
David Schaich (he): We have factors of 2
David Schaich (he): square root of 2 cubed. You also have an Mq.
David Schaich (he): And now I mute the 3 halves.
David Schaich (he): So all of those actors I raised the 3 halves
David Schaich (he): with the denominator just being 3.
David Schaich (he): I square H Bar queued.
David Schaich (he): So there is. There are a few interesting things about this result. Be obviously
David Schaich (he): fact of the simplification that we've been able to get
David Schaich (he): from approximately the every function as a step into Google.
David Schaich (he): Sorry a step function in the integral.
David Schaich (he): Maybe the most obvious is that there is no longer any temperature unlike what we saw, for
David Schaich (he): it's folks on the
David Schaich (he): where this same number density was proportional to T Qued.
David Schaich (he): We should caution that that's not general resolve is what
David Schaich (he): we get just in this low temperature limit.
More generally
David Schaich (he): this results. and all the results that we will be getting from our step function, approximation or just
David Schaich (he): yeah meeting order.
David Schaich (he): The full result that would have retain this exponential factor in the integration which we can
David Schaich (he): expand
David Schaich (he): powers of the
David Schaich (he): small CD. Over mute.
That
David Schaich (he): may well be
David Schaich (he): one of those supplemental Andcasts that
David Schaich (he): we'll be coming out instead of one of the lectures
David Schaich (he): in the next couple of weeks that makes use of
David Schaich (he): expansion
David Schaich (he): as a way to
David Schaich (he): evaluate those integrals with less extreme approximations.
David Schaich (he): and the place in the and the ocean by the step function.
David Schaich (he): Another interesting aspect of this is just the functional dependence on the various quantities we have that Mq. To H. Are huge are coming along on the Grand Canonical potential.
David Schaich (he): the new
David Schaich (he): a piece of play. In this result the number density is
David Schaich (he): the 3 halves power
David Schaich (he): of the chemical potential which we can justify by
David Schaich (he): physical arguments.
David Schaich (he): a mathematical one. So the physical sure that would lead us to this overall functional form
from the
David Schaich (he): housing factors. So we have computed
David Schaich (he): is that in this low temperature limits
David Schaich (he): we can recall what we saw. Oh, year 4
David Schaich (he): economical spin systems. We talk about the ground state and excited states and the low temperature limit. It was an exponential.
David Schaich (he): a strong preference for particles to hang out in the ground states with
David Schaich (he): the occupation of higher energy states exponentially suppressed by Boltzmann factor.
David Schaich (he): In this case it's fermions.
David Schaich (he): The most energy levels can only hold a single fermion. and any additional fermions beyond that have to
David Schaich (he): go in and fill up higher energy levels.
David Schaich (he): all of which will
David Schaich (he): be occupied up until that threshold we saw in the fermi function. So all energy levels with the energy less than you.
David Schaich (he): You have the
David Schaich (he): maximum occupation number for fermions
David Schaich (he): and all of the energy levels
David Schaich (he): with you about me, and this low temperature minutes will be empty or unoccupied.
David Schaich (he): So we can call
David Schaich (he): that the energies we have for these energy levels
David Schaich (he): are proportional to a square, the inner product of that integer 3. Vector
David Schaich (he): So when we I to count the overall number of particles per unit volume.
David Schaich (he): that number is really filling
the
David Schaich (he): positive options.
David Schaich (he): So part of the here.
David Schaich (he): If the reading is given by. so the the energy is less than Mu and K squared
David Schaich (he): it's related to the square root of view. So
David Schaich (he): the overall number is given by something. so it's proportional to our queue, which is
David Schaich (he): this is
David Schaich (he): again a picture of
David Schaich (he): what's going on graphically rather than absolutely in terms of integrals.
David Schaich (he): The textbook I took this from through this introduction to thermal physics uses.
David Schaich (he): and rather than our K or yeah integer vector
David Schaich (he): all of the
David Schaich (he): energy levels themselves are given by these dots. So integer values of
David Schaich (he): Yeah. hey? On one to infinity, in just the positive options
David Schaich (he): of this 3 here. So we see that this queue, but then all those energy levels fall into.
David Schaich (he): He is founded by the X Y. And Z, and so only positive numbers are contributing and
David Schaich (he): based on the approximation that we have
David Schaich (he): an extremely large number of these energy levels extremely close to space, we can approximate it
David Schaich (he): all those discrete points. our purposes of easy integration. I. This
David Schaich (he): it to the here in the sphere of the coordinates
David Schaich (he): which has just led to us.
David Schaich (he): adding in some of this
David Schaich (he): extra
David Schaich (he): space between this year and the energy levels themselves.
David Schaich (he): It looks like a poor approximation in this plot, just because
David Schaich (he): this is considering so few statements. When we get up to things like avagado's, number our usual domain or statistical physics. The error of this approximation gets down to
David Schaich (he): the usual sorts of things like one part intend to be power 20
the previous of this year
David Schaich (he): is
David Schaich (he): you can buy this. hey, Max
David Schaich (he): proportional to
David Schaich (he): square root of the energy
David Schaich (he): square root of new. and that is
David Schaich (he): where we are getting the volume.
David Schaich (he): The free powers of that
David Schaich (he): you in
David Schaich (he): all right approximate.
David Schaich (he): I calculated results.
David Schaich (he): And
David Schaich (he): this energy.
David Schaich (he): the threshold that is being set by the chemical potential. Here you see, it corresponds to the
David Schaich (he): the maximum energy. That's the for me as an individual. For me it has
David Schaich (he): in this non-relativistic no temperature gas in particular the 0. Temperature with it
David Schaich (he): this maximum energy
David Schaich (he): of an individual particle
David Schaich (he): is defined to be something called Germany energy.
So
David Schaich (he): an E. With a capital F subscript
David Schaich (he): which in the 0 temperature limits is equal to the chemical potential that we can
David Schaich (he): relate to the number density by inverting it. Just the quality. Thank you.
David Schaich (he): Each bar and 3 pi square that
David Schaich (he): go into the numerator. When we take the two-thirds power and h bar queue converts to
David Schaich (he): and H. Bar squared i'll keep the perhaps power explicit.
David Schaich (he): The 3 pi squared and then 2 new Sorry to M.
David Schaich (he): Comes to the wall for the ride.
David Schaich (he): so we have the maximum energy.
David Schaich (he): I'll be you for me on in the 0 temperature limit given by the two-thirds power of the number of decades
David Schaich (he): of those. And this relation with
David Schaich (he): the chemical potential this quality is again something that only holds in that 0 temperature limit
David Schaich (he): and the Z over the expansion of the full integral
David Schaich (he): involved in. Do you
David Schaich (he): exponential factor in the fairly function. gives us corrections to that that breaks this equality.
David Schaich (he): and leads to
David Schaich (he): corrections to.
David Schaich (he): or differences between, that chemical potential and
David Schaich (he): every energy which we roll get to a bit later on. Or now
David Schaich (he): also to see if there are questions about the
David Schaich (he): calculate, the approximation, the calculation, or physical interpretation
David Schaich (he): that we've called through
David Schaich (he): it's keeping involved.
David Schaich (he): keeping in mind or goal of given to the equation of state. Yeah. A few more pieces to relates to
David Schaich (he): just the number
David Schaich (he): up for me on the screen canonical calculation.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): the next on the we can look at is actually the one we started off with for the photon gas.
David Schaich (he): That is the
David Schaich (he): internal energy
David Schaich (he): which
David Schaich (he): you look at from very similar calculation as the number density. So I remember pointing out last week
David Schaich (he): that in the case of the photon gas
David Schaich (he): computations that we did first to produce the planning spectrum, and then to derive the equation of state. The you number of photons involved the integral
David Schaich (he): over something that looked almost like the like spectrum, but different from it by a factor of H. Bar Omega.
David Schaich (he): which was just the energy of individual photon.
David Schaich (he): which is a
David Schaich (he): natural wait for things to be organized if we reflect on that. So, rather than charging through and taking the derivative of the or economical potential
David Schaich (he): with respect to temperature that would
David Schaich (he): reduce the
David Schaich (he): internal energy expectation value for us. We can reflect this, and we argue
David Schaich (he): more conceptually that the energy density should just be given by the number of particles
David Schaich (he): with a given energy. So. in addition to counting the number of particles over
David Schaich (he): any range in energy integrating over that.
David Schaich (he): we should wait that number by a factor of the energy in our integrals
David Schaich (he): which then just picks up an extra factor right
David Schaich (he): of the energy there.
David Schaich (he): Again, prior to
David Schaich (he): integrating. which is to say that. compared to the number, density, the internal energy, density per unit volume.
David Schaich (he): as everything the
David Schaich (he): seen, as we found about before integrating just with that extra EU in front of the very functioning
David Schaich (he): which.
David Schaich (he): if we now I can apply our step function, approximation to the primary function
David Schaich (he): that will kill off
David Schaich (he): everything in this
David Schaich (he): integral, larger for energy is larger than the chemical potential new. and what will be left is 3 half hours of the energy to integrate.
David Schaich (he): which, instead of bringing in a two-thirds, now brings in
David Schaich (he): 2 fits.
David Schaich (he): So that same factor of 2 that gives us a
David Schaich (he): 2 times mass times chemical potential to the 3 house power.
David Schaich (he): We have either the 5 hands evaluated at view as an extra factor of you to get a total of 5 halves. There
David Schaich (he): you can have a 5 rather than 3.
David Schaich (he): Multiplying the I squared H bar cubed.
David Schaich (he): and that's
David Schaich (he): that is the result which. written in this way is clearly
David Schaich (he): proportional to the number, density
David Schaich (he): and the proportionality factor just being
David Schaich (he): 8 3 2,
David Schaich (he): it's 5 to replace it. the overall factor of chemical essential.
David Schaich (he): and then everything else is a result for the number density so canceling it the density we have it. As for the photon gas, a relation between
David Schaich (he): the internal energy. And
David Schaich (he): now i'm relativistic for me on number.
David Schaich (he): and in particular. If we
David Schaich (he): divide
David Schaich (he): through that for me on number. we can
David Schaich (he): find the
David Schaich (he): average energy per particle in the 0 temperature limits.
David Schaich (he): So energy
David Schaich (he): average over the
David Schaich (he): number of particles is just the meaning factor. Three-fifths times the chemical potential view which in the 0 temperature is
David Schaich (he): that fairly function.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): we have seen not only that the maximum value of the energy in this low temperature for me on gas
David Schaich (he): is given by the fermi energy
David Schaich (he): related to the two-thirds power of the particle number density.
David Schaich (he): average energy from all of those formulas that are steadily filling up every single energy level. Up to that the energy is
David Schaich (he): just a little over one half of the value of the maximum.
David Schaich (he): So that's
David Schaich (he): telling us for basically extracting the problem
David Schaich (he): information about how the energy laws are very for the
David Schaich (he): definition of the energy proportional to K. Squared. It's not
David Schaich (he): just a uniform function of K squared that would give
David Schaich (he): and energy of exactly half the maximum. On average.
David Schaich (he): there's a good You' to it for more generally curvature.
David Schaich (he): so that we end up with an average a little over half
David Schaich (he): of the maximum.
David Schaich (he): So there's
David Schaich (he): just a couple more steps to the equation of States
David Schaich (he): may well be able to
David Schaich (he): before taking a brief break. Are there questions about the internal energy or the computation? The average energy we have gone through for this low temperature
David Schaich (he): simplifies limit
David Schaich (he): to keeping those results in mind.
David Schaich (he): There is a little more that we can say about that physical picture of
David Schaich (he): for me on this
David Schaich (he): building up every energy level
David Schaich (he): due to the quality, exclusion principle.
David Schaich (he): Perhaps the
David Schaich (he): most obvious consequence of this, which
David Schaich (he): I should point out explicitly, is the fact that the energy
David Schaich (he): of this gas remains
David Schaich (he): non-zero, or even as
David Schaich (he): temperature goes to 0. So that's very different both from the classical
David Schaich (he): canonical, no more optimistic ideal gas that we looked at
David Schaich (he): earlier in the term
David Schaich (he): energy, which is 3 halves times the glum of particles times the temperature
David Schaich (he): vanishes as the temperature vanishes with the proton gas. It was even more dramatic. The particle number itself vanished
David Schaich (he): like the temperature tube.
David Schaich (he): the energy advantage like temperature to the fourth power very highly suppressed. Hello, temperatures here, thanks to poly exclusion that is forcing fermions to fill energy levels
David Schaich (he): with non-zero energies up to that maximum of the fermi energy, and on average. 60 of the fermi energy. We keep
David Schaich (he): a non-zero value of the energy and the limit of absolute 0 temperature.
David Schaich (he): But there's also
David Schaich (he): gives us a justification
David Schaich (he): or a assumption that I made that
David Schaich (he): you didn't feel like challenging me on in the
David Schaich (he): look at the Jeremy function that we did to justify its approximation by a step function. I started at all by it, saying that. Yeah.
David Schaich (he): we were assuming a positive chemical potential
David Schaich (he): that I did not emphasize there. I would not remind you there that this is
David Schaich (he): not what we might have expected, coming out of our work on the
David Schaich (he): those on to general. when we saw that in order for the Geometric series to converge and give us the those I've assigned. Grand Canonical partition function and the potential for which everything else was
David Schaich (he): determine we needed to have. Do you look being less than
David Schaich (he): any energy? And in general you is less than 0
David Schaich (he): just coming from his definition in the Grand Canonical potential as the
David Schaich (he): variation and the energy that's required to be able to add or remove particles while keeping the
David Schaich (he): interview fixed.
David Schaich (he): But with this picture of poly exclusion leading to
David Schaich (he): all of the energy levels being filled up to the
David Schaich (he): you can
David Schaich (he): justify after the fact. power.
David Schaich (he): Earlier assumption that
David Schaich (he): view is the chemical potential is
David Schaich (he): positive, at least 4
David Schaich (he): for me on gases below temperature limits.
David Schaich (he): So we have. That new is the response of the energy to a change in the particle number.
David Schaich (he): While keeping an entropy and voting fixed.
David Schaich (he): And in this low temperature you going to 0, where we have
David Schaich (he): every energy level filled up to the fermi energy.
David Schaich (he): every energy level with a higher energy unoccupied.
David Schaich (he): We just well, that is the one and only
David Schaich (he): microstates that the system can have
David Schaich (he): everyone.
David Schaich (he): no other
David Schaich (he): options.
David Schaich (he): and with a single energy
David Schaich (he): that has 100% probability.
David Schaich (he): We call our general expression for the entropy to some
David Schaich (he): over all of those microstates
David Schaich (he): walk of those probabilities.
David Schaich (he): and that just equals
David Schaich (he): 0. When
David Schaich (he): there's a single microstate with 100% probability
David Schaich (he): in particular.
David Schaich (he): that's
David Schaich (he): entropy remains. Cost is
David Schaich (he): even if we add
David Schaich (he): particles
David Schaich (he): to the system. We always have a single micro stage.
David Schaich (he): really
David Schaich (he): a number of particles
David Schaich (he): changing the energy level and the fermi energy shifts to a higher energy level as any additional particles
David Schaich (he): are added to
David Schaich (he): more of those energy levels. their maximum occupation number. So for you
David Schaich (he): have some positive increase in the number of particles. The only place they can go is to the energy level is immediately above. If you any energy. the initial fermi energy they fill those
David Schaich (he): and shit
David Schaich (he): the grabbing energy to
David Schaich (he): the next higher level.
David Schaich (he): seeing that the energy is equal to M for
David Schaich (he): the 0 temperature limit.
David Schaich (he): and if we add some number of particles.
David Schaich (he): the energies around this changing the energy is just going to be. You got her. She calls each of those new particles times the number of particles that we have
David Schaich (he): also greater than 0. See that
David Schaich (he): that response and 0 temperatures, for here is just equal to view
David Schaich (he): It's giving us new equals new.
David Schaich (he): but in general a positive increase in response to a positive change to particle number.
David Schaich (he): So it you greater than 0, as we assumed earlier.
David Schaich (he): and we know that and higher temperatures.
David Schaich (he): Eventually
David Schaich (he): we will
David Schaich (he): you back to the high temperature classical limit
David Schaich (he): of this low temperature.
David Schaich (he): Very direct distribution Conversions with the Bose-einstein Distribution of the Maxwell. Ultimate distribution coming from classical calculations. Yeah. Requires the chemical potential
David Schaich (he): running off to very large negative numbers.
David Schaich (he): And
David Schaich (he): this is
David Schaich (he): something that we can see happening
David Schaich (he): through the same sorts of expansions.
David Schaich (he): Some of the overall expansions mentioned earlier.
David Schaich (he): and that is going to the I'm. Not discussed today, like in the last few months supplemental
David Schaich (he): recording will be able to confirm. But this is the case. The kind of a potential changes positive to negative as the temperature increases and move away from
David Schaich (he): the step function approximation for it
David Schaich (he): very function.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): we still have one last step to get the equation of States. But
David Schaich (he): even the time it gets worthwhile to take a bit of a break before going through that it'll take just a few more minutes.
David Schaich (he): Are there any questions about this low temperature
David Schaich (he): system, and it's
David Schaich (he): essentially unusual behavior with a single microstate. Before I pause the recording and take the 10min break
David Schaich (he): until 100'clock.
David Schaich (he): Not seeing any. I will
David Schaich (he): pause things and reconvene in 10min.
David Schaich (he): All right.
David Schaich (he): I didn't you get back in your way?
David Schaich (he): I can make
David Schaich (he): going away any questions occur during that.
David Schaich (he): It's not. We can
David Schaich (he): turn to the last piece of the
David Schaich (he): and our usual Pv. Equals. and t so he
David Schaich (he): you see you
David Schaich (he): for sure i'm just for you on gas that we want to determine from that usual relation between
David Schaich (he): the pressure and the response.
David Schaich (he): the internal energy to a change in the volume. while keeping the number of particles. The entropy you of that for me, I guess, fixed.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): the energy is just needed to
David Schaich (he): particle number itself with that. A real factor of 3 fifths times the chemical potential
David Schaich (he): here and is fixed.
David Schaich (he): And if we again consider the we'll take a few minutes. we will have an easy way to
David Schaich (he): fix the entropy as
David Schaich (he): you.
David Schaich (he): So, as in our considerations above
David Schaich (he): justifying the positive chemical potential
David Schaich (he): low temperatures.
David Schaich (he): it's your temperature limits.
David Schaich (he): You've set single microstates you described
David Schaich (he): with all energy levels up to the fermi energy field
David Schaich (he): on under she levels above the fermi energy empty.
David Schaich (he): therefore, with single microstate, with a 100%
David Schaich (he): it's the constant entropy of 0.
David Schaich (he): No matter what we do to the volume, I think, fixed
David Schaich (he): for me on number.
David Schaich (he): The non-trivial aspect of this relation is how
David Schaich (he): that chemical potential depends on the volume.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): the first half of today I computed
David Schaich (he): very energy that's equal to the chemical potential in this low temperature
David Schaich (he): in terms out of the year.
David Schaich (he): average number density so i'm building
David Schaich (he): the potential
David Schaich (he): that we are taking the derivative of that it's all we used to be a two-thirds power.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): the pressure that results from what we've already computed in slow temperature limits
David Schaich (he): has
David Schaich (he): all of these factors together. The 3 fifths
David Schaich (he): h bar squared, over 2 m.
David Schaich (he): 3 pi squared to the two-thirds
David Schaich (he): article number raised to two-thirds, plus one
is
David Schaich (he): 5 thirds power. Finally, the one over the
David Schaich (he): it should be two-thirds dependence on the volume. It's a simple derivative that brings down negative
David Schaich (he): two-thirds times one over V.
David Schaich (he): Reduce the power.
David Schaich (he): Okay by one is
David Schaich (he): the negative cancel out. We have 2 of the 3, the times all of those other factors which we
David Schaich (he): just got from the energy itself.
So.
David Schaich (he): not bothering to rewrite all of that, but just identifying it with the energy we started off with it. You you have 3
David Schaich (he): relations for pressure in terms of either
David Schaich (he): internal energy particle number or particle density.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): the first one that we have here it's just that the pressure is two-thirds the average internal energy density.
David Schaich (he): If we
David Schaich (he): plug in the relation we started off with between yeah energy and
David Schaich (he): number
David Schaich (he): at two-thirds times 3 halves will
David Schaich (he): actually they can't solely the two-fifths you know role factor in the potential. And then do you article number yesterday?
David Schaich (he): And if we insert our mew and evolves a
David Schaich (he): two-thirds power of that number density.
David Schaich (he): pick up
David Schaich (he): well 2 fifths over 2. It's one, fifth times that H. Bar squared over the M. H. 4 squared over 5 and
David Schaich (he): 3 pi squared, and the 2 first power. and then again 5 through its powers of
David Schaich (he): at number, density and average over
David Schaich (he): all right as a new
David Schaich (he): variable row with the density.
David Schaich (he): This is the 5 through its power.
Hopefully, I
David Schaich (he): right roads and P. Sufficiently distinctly
David Schaich (he): to make it clear which is which.
David Schaich (he): This density row is just the average particle number
David Schaich (he): 3. The following that gets raised in 5 through is power.
David Schaich (he): and the results for the pressure. So
David Schaich (he): we have several ways of expressing the pressure.
David Schaich (he): none of which depend on the temperature in this limit.
David Schaich (he): so there he is. nothing resembling it. The ideal gas and functional form, unlike the photographs.
David Schaich (he): and not surprisingly, Given the direct relation between pressure and average internal energy.
David Schaich (he): they will have
David Schaich (he): the same
David Schaich (he): non-zero limits
David Schaich (he): 4 0 temperatures
David Schaich (he): which we Don't have for
David Schaich (he): ev equals. and t from the ideal gas law. What do you variance of that? What we derived for the
David Schaich (he): this non-zero pressure is Oh, perhaps confusingly
David Schaich (he): generous and pressure?
David Schaich (he): We're
David Schaich (he): this term degeneracy.
David Schaich (he): It's confusing because it doesn't actually have to do with
David Schaich (he): multiple energy levels with the same value of the energy. What we need defined to be to general energy levels last week. This is some more. some of the obscure historical
David Schaich (he): convention calling the non-zero pressure with the low temperature, family gas.
David Schaich (he): the degeneracy pressure of the
David Schaich (he): your degeneracy is referring to all of those energy levels being filled, even though they have
David Schaich (he): for energies to the same border with
David Schaich (he): 2 different meetings
David Schaich (he): just from the historical development.
David Schaich (he): and it's worth emphasizing that this pressure
David Schaich (he): is not actually coming from direct interactions or forces
David Schaich (he): between those fermions, but from again the poly exclusion principle that
David Schaich (he): forces
David Schaich (he): it requires rather than
being a force. It requires
David Schaich (he): the the electrons or the fermions in
David Schaich (he): this gas to occupy different energy levels. It's not coming from
David Schaich (he): the force between
David Schaich (he): those fermions.
David Schaich (he): And if you get that. consider this result just as a limit of more complicated temperature dependence, we can jump back to the classical limit
David Schaich (he): we are. We should expect to recover the classical. Id. You will get a small
David Schaich (he): that we
David Schaich (he): previously derived in that limit.
David Schaich (he): So as the temperature increases away from the regime that we've been analyzing here.
David Schaich (he): you would expect the pressure to eventually take the Forum of Mt or V, which we can repackage, is it has the row times to you.
David Schaich (he): and a numerical evaluation of
David Schaich (he): the full pressure of a non-relativistic for me on gas and great economic. This curve which, by the I thought code for it is
David Schaich (he): in the repository for this module.
David Schaich (he): where we can see the smooth
David Schaich (he): interpolation between these 2 limits that
David Schaich (he): you've been considering. Foresee low temperature limits. Going to t. Going to 0 is pressure in arbitrary units
David Schaich (he): does not go to 0, but flatten out into
David Schaich (he): it's constant degeneracy pressure that so
David Schaich (he): we just derived. It depends
David Schaich (he): on the 5 through it. These new variable factors that
David Schaich (he): convert through a place costed from a number density to
David Schaich (he): the pressure of force per unit area.
David Schaich (he): The other limit of high temperatures. Where we recover
David Schaich (he): classical statistics from the underlying.
David Schaich (he): Also
David Schaich (he): we have the I of us now.
David Schaich (he): P. Is
David Schaich (he): proportionally to the temperature, so it turns from the constant to a straight line. some curvature in between.
David Schaich (he): and the slope
David Schaich (he): of. That
David Schaich (he): is just the density of the number density of the
Let me
David Schaich (he): precise computation of how
David Schaich (he): the pressure turns over from that cost it's degeneracy. Pressure to the high temperature. Ideal gas now is another thing that can be computed systematically in
David Schaich (he): extensions. In that low temperature
David Schaich (he): you relative to the chemical potential for you. We will not do so here and now. It's gonna be both. Look at a consequence of this mole. Is your pressure
David Schaich (he): at low temperatures
David Schaich (he): connected to. and some interesting
David Schaich (he): physics related to.
David Schaich (he): the evolution of the universe.
David Schaich (he): should have plenty of time to get through that. Are there questions about
David Schaich (he): low temperature. Turn me on. Yes, pressure before we talk about super yours.
David Schaich (he): feel free to jump into questions do occur. I will move on if I,
David Schaich (he): emphasizing that the calculations we've been doing
David Schaich (he): things like this Degeneracy pressure
David Schaich (he): don't require in general exactly
David Schaich (he): 0 temperature. That's the limit where we've been working, but that limit remains a good approximation.
David Schaich (he): so more as the temperature is relatively small
David Schaich (he): in question, relatively small, relative to what. as it's in that, things like this
David Schaich (he): degeneracy pressure. the color significant
David Schaich (he): when the temperature is small relative to yeah, fairly energy.
David Schaich (he): Even if
David Schaich (he): that temperature is non-zero, it might look
David Schaich (he): relatively large by our everyday standards.
David Schaich (he): We can recall that that Germany energy is equal to the chemical potential in the limit of 0 temperature.
David Schaich (he): but that
David Schaich (he): equality is broken at higher temperatures where it is the
David Schaich (he): every energy itself that matters, and that sets the average energy of the fermions and the it has to. They fill the energy levels up to every surface.
David Schaich (he): and we saw
David Schaich (he): earlier on this result
David Schaich (he): that this fairly energy is proportionate.
David Schaich (he): 2 particle number des to be to the 2 thirds
David Schaich (he): power. So we're going to be 2 thirds. So
David Schaich (he): we have one of your densities
David Schaich (he): larger. The energy is not surprisingly. There are more
David Schaich (he): to, you know, more energy levels up to higher values of the energy
David Schaich (he): set by that 2 through its power
David Schaich (he): which will allow our calculations to be
David Schaich (he): valid and good approximations.
David Schaich (he): 4 larger temperatures
David Schaich (he): so too orient ourselves with
David Schaich (he): concrete physical applications
David Schaich (he): of these calculations. If we look first at
David Schaich (he): every the materials and specifically
David Schaich (he): metals that
David Schaich (he): allow electrical current to
David Schaich (he): I conduct
David Schaich (he): That current is carried by. What are we conducting electrons that behave like a gas?
David Schaich (he): They are not tied to individual atoms in this metal, but they are free to
David Schaich (he): move around
David Schaich (he): the the metal and carry that flow of electric currents
David Schaich (he): and typical metals have in round numbers
David Schaich (he): how we got those number worth of conducting electrons.
David Schaich (he): cubic centimeter.
David Schaich (he): So for you
David Schaich (he): plug in those numbers. How they got those numbers up 10 to the 23
David Schaich (he): for cubic centimeter, and we can convert
David Schaich (he): centimeters, 2 meters
David Schaich (he): by a factor of a 100 cube. That gives us 10 to the 6,
David Schaich (he): multiplying 10 to the 3 is overall about 10 to the how we're 20 million.
David Schaich (he): Nothing electron on this per cubic meter I mean typical metal and
David Schaich (he): plugging in the constants and the relation between
David Schaich (he): and density to
David Schaich (he): get a value for the fairy energy. I just tell you. is at the order of magnitude, corresponding to 10 to 29 electrons per cubic meter.
David Schaich (he): It's fairly energy roughly into the fourth kilo. You're working in units where energy and temperature having the same dimensions, so it's fine to express an energy
David Schaich (he): in terms of Kelvin. You can also plug in with the conversion factors to
David Schaich (he): we that to a single electron volt for a relatively small number of joules. 10 to the minus 19 joules, where tools per kelvin
David Schaich (he): is
David Schaich (he): that conversion factors called the Boltzmann Constant, which is.
David Schaich (he): relates these different choices of units over the energy.
David Schaich (he): and since we mostly work with everyday temperatures less than 10,000 kelvin. So right now we're about all right.
David Schaich (he): 200 by the
David Schaich (he): Helen 20 degrees centigrade.
David Schaich (he): That is much less than 10 to 4. So in everyday metals
David Schaich (he): we can
David Schaich (he): have easily temperatures that are low.
David Schaich (he): With respect to
David Schaich (he): yeah fairly energy well described by
David Schaich (he): it's so cold. He generates
David Schaich (he): electron gas
David Schaich (he): again in the sense of having a single micro stage approximately
David Schaich (he): rather than all energy levels being equal.
David Schaich (he): And this connects to some of the huge capacities that
David Schaich (he): we're looking at the tutorials for sounds like. or a computation or an analysis of those heat capacities as coming from
David Schaich (he): that degenerate electron. Yes, and the low temperature limit actually gives us some information that turns out to be
David Schaich (he): a good description of how
David Schaich (he): those metals actually.
it is
David Schaich (he): coming up on this Thursday. We didn't get to it last week, focusing on the
David Schaich (he): higher temperature dynamics of the atoms in addition to the electrons in those solids.
David Schaich (he): So that's
David Schaich (he): initial orientation for the connection between density and F me, energy for everyday materials. a little iron.
David Schaich (he): If we start thinking about
David Schaich (he): scholars and supernovas, and, for example.
David Schaich (he): Star, you know best. is our son.
David Schaich (he): What surprised me to point out
David Schaich (he): first check this might be counterintuitive. Is that the
David Schaich (he): so actually has? It's similar
David Schaich (he): density to everyday metals sitting around
David Schaich (he): up here
David Schaich (he): all the desks and the
David Schaich (he): what comes through cubic meter rather than 10 to 29. I should say that is.
David Schaich (he): on average, Throughout the song there are some variations like orders that we go from
David Schaich (he): the core to the
David Schaich (he): but people responding. I mean energy, for the selling is also similar to that for electrons we work with on a daily basis. So.
David Schaich (he): in order of magnitude to the two-thirds powers, about a factor of 5, which gets us up from
David Schaich (he): 10,000 Kelvin to about 100,000 Kelvin.
David Schaich (he): The big difference in the sum compared to
David Schaich (he): what we experience here on Earth
David Schaich (he): is the higher temperature.
exactly
David Schaich (he): much higher temperature, especially in
David Schaich (he): that core region that is getting up to
David Schaich (he): of order of 10 million kelvin, which now.
David Schaich (he): rather than being much smaller than that, for the energy
David Schaich (he): is at least a couple of
David Schaich (he): You're at least in the
David Schaich (he): density is maximized.
David Schaich (he): The
David Schaich (he): reason for this is
David Schaich (he): both of these acts, the
David Schaich (he): relatively low density
David Schaich (he): that's not too different from the and the much higher temperature. I do, too. all the nuclear fusion
David Schaich (he): that is occurring in the core of the sun. that nuclear fusion is
David Schaich (he): releasing vast amounts of heat and light which we are grateful for.
David Schaich (he): as it is the ultimate source of essentially all of the energy that we have access to all her.
David Schaich (he): Yeah. it's coming from
David Schaich (he): nuclear fusion.
David Schaich (he): A single proton can be a nucleus being 2 protons, one or 2 neutrons.
David Schaich (he): and this
David Schaich (he): fusion has both of these effects.
David Schaich (he): It's a huge amount of heat
David Schaich (he): into the that he itself is a
David Schaich (he): form of
David Schaich (he): Yes, this electronic radiation predominantly. So both the heat and the white are. and that huge radiation pressure is.
David Schaich (he): after balancing to
David Schaich (he): a large extent to the
David Schaich (he): large gravitational forces
David Schaich (he): that are generated by it.
David Schaich (he): Enormous amount to it. Matter that is, in this.
David Schaich (he): This is a precise balance. The sun is in equilibrium with
David Schaich (he): balanced precisely by this out of the face we're pushing radiation pressure.
David Schaich (he): and that pressure is pushing out
David Schaich (he): all of the material in the sun. spreading it out over here
David Schaich (he): larger volume and
David Schaich (he): and reducing it.
David Schaich (he): It's to be my. It's down to
David Schaich (he): an average just the not much more than we have
David Schaich (he): here on Earth our everyday materials.
David Schaich (he): something interesting happens in the course of stellar evolution for sons that
David Schaich (he): burn all of the hydrogen and the nuclei that they have available.
David Schaich (he): fusing them into a larger. You the I like
of oxygen.
David Schaich (he): So after
David Schaich (he): yeah, basic
David Schaich (he): fuel for
David Schaich (he): silver fusion.
David Schaich (he): it's exhausted.
David Schaich (he): It will be a steep drop in the radiation pressure. No more fusion to.
David Schaich (he): and you can expect
David Schaich (he): in this case finish burning a hydrogen helium that they have available.
David Schaich (he): We'll exhibit it
David Schaich (he): significantly higher density from the gravitational traction
David Schaich (he): of their maps.
David Schaich (he): The details of how that higher density
David Schaich (he): develops, and it's. In the course of the source. Lifetime depends.
David Schaich (he): The mass of the star starts off with. and if we consider stars that have roughly the mass of our son.
David Schaich (he): they will generally turn into what it calls
David Schaich (he): white dwarf stars.
David Schaich (he): which pack
David Schaich (he): some overall mass into a volume
David Schaich (he): with the radius roughly
David Schaich (he): of the earth. so still fairly large, fine
David Schaich (he): our standards with that the earth's a 100 times
David Schaich (he): smaller than that of the sun.
David Schaich (he): which means that the density of the way toward is a 100 times cube. So after 10 to the 6
David Schaich (he): you're talking something like tend to be 36
David Schaich (he): electrons. They're focusing on the electrons, because those are
David Schaich (he): for me. On some like certainly
David Schaich (he): to put 10 to the 36 electrons for cubic meter in Hey, you different set of units. That's maybe more suggestive of just how.
David Schaich (he): in terms of the mass density of this material
David Schaich (he): that is about a telling. So a 1,000kg per cubic centimeter of white torque material. So
David Schaich (he): indeed.
David Schaich (he): and they could do
David Schaich (he): the same calculation for the ferry energy.
David Schaich (he): 10 to the sixth increase in you can see this raised to the two-thirds power.
David Schaich (he): So the and the the 5 Kelvin, very energy of the it's raised to an orders of magnitude a building
David Schaich (he): which is much larger even than
David Schaich (he): the high temperatures of 10 million kelvin.
David Schaich (he): In the course of stars like our son, as they
David Schaich (he): exhaust the last few of them immediately after those nuclear fusion processes seeks.
David Schaich (he): And
David Schaich (he): this 10 million Kelvin temperature is actually the worst case for your white dwarf. As time goes on
David Schaich (he): slowly, continue emitting
David Schaich (he): radiation and using that heat so cooling down.
David Schaich (he): Ultimately, after several trillion years, it will reach the
David Schaich (he): temperature of the cosmic microwave background, probably 2.7 kelvin. So second orders of magnitude smaller
David Schaich (he): after the 14 million years that the universe has been around. and
David Schaich (he): a similar amount of time. The oldest white force has been sitting out there slowly cooling.
David Schaich (he): It's gotten down to a few 1,000 kelvin.
David Schaich (he): and that
David Schaich (he): it's what team
David Schaich (he): and well.
David Schaich (he): it's actually the reason that white dwarfs are able to exist survive and hang around to
David Schaich (he): cool over such long amounts of time
David Schaich (he): is. thanks to the degeneracy pressure of the low temperature electron gas. Yeah. they have. thanks to their low temperature relative to
David Schaich (he): you for me. And
David Schaich (he): so remember that without the radiation pressure will be in
David Schaich (he): renewed nuclear fusion of hydro and helium
David Schaich (he): that is no longer available to counteract
David Schaich (he): gravitational collapse.
David Schaich (he): But that gravitational collapse does. and
David Schaich (he): precisely thanks to
David Schaich (he): the degeneracy pressure that we computed just after the great today.
David Schaich (he): At these high densities the the degeneracy pressure of fixing
David Schaich (he): it matters. If it comes not right, you will.
David Schaich (he): It prevents
David Schaich (he): further gravitational collapse to even denser objects like neutral stars.
particular
cool.
David Schaich (he): which
David Schaich (he): is yeah.
David Schaich (he): fascinating
David Schaich (he): manifestation of the
David Schaich (he): the pressure of you know.
David Schaich (he): temperature fermi on gases, their thermodynamics in general rising from the quantum statistics in
David Schaich (he): part of these massive natural physical objects. Something even more interesting can happen, thanks to that degeneracy pressure. If this went to what
David Schaich (he): has a companion star, it exists in what's called yeah binary star system.
David Schaich (he): So this is 2 solid sets. We'll be around each other
David Schaich (he): if one of them becomes a white dwarf. After exhausting it's hydrogen and healing supply
David Schaich (he): it's high. Density. It leads to very strong gravitational fields. That's that. With 2 actually captioning matter from his companion.
David Schaich (he): another star.
David Schaich (he): typically a star that is still burning.
David Schaich (he): And as the light to worth.
David Schaich (he): Slowly, with Sally these pieces of its neighboring star. Over hundreds or thousands or millions of years. it's mass increases. and it's larger density
David Schaich (he): will eventually reach a
David Schaich (he): very special
David Schaich (he): mass. So it's the overall mass that matters which can be converted to a density of the usual way of printing. This is about 40% larger
David Schaich (he): at that point.
David Schaich (he): The density is large enough for
David Schaich (he): different fusion processes to occurred
David Schaich (he): in particular, carbon and oxygen, which
David Schaich (he): left over after the hydrogen and helium. all fuse together
David Schaich (he): are able to fuse at those high densities. So this is
David Schaich (he): an artist's illustration of this sort of binary system. and the
David Schaich (he): process of
like to work
David Schaich (he): what we have there
David Schaich (he): sucking in matter. and from this larger higher. what? Your companion that has a larger radiation pressure pushing one of its cash to order distances with less gravitational binding.
David Schaich (he): There's this steady accretion
David Schaich (he): matter into the wet dwarf, which we can observe next to the characteristic behavior of what's called the secretion disk is the comes in that's gravitational
David Schaich (he): sucked into the white from itself, increasing its energy. I'm sorry, increasing this mass.
David Schaich (he): increasing its density.
David Schaich (he): and at this Chandra seek our limit.
David Schaich (he): enabling carbon and oxygen fusion
David Schaich (he): To begin
David Schaich (he): at that point.
David Schaich (he): that first bit of cognitive oxygen fusion helps a bit of
David Schaich (he): energy into
David Schaich (he): the star before that can have an effect in the form of
David Schaich (he): radiation pressure. Expanding the size of the star.
David Schaich (he): it actually well heats up the particles right around it.
David Schaich (he): needing to. You see reaction
David Schaich (he): doing more carbon and oxygen fusion.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): it's called a thermal nuclear explosion. From that chain reaction.
David Schaich (he): the have the true of the star
David Schaich (he): increase this problem. What might have going down the tens of thousands of Calvin over millions or billions of years within the space of a few seconds. It's explodes up to
David Schaich (he): a 1 billionin California.
David Schaich (he): I use the
David Schaich (he): term, explodes deliberately. So back in there.
David Schaich (he): This is precisely what you
David Schaich (he): supernova explosion particular what's called
David Schaich (he): a supernova of type. one a
historical reasons.
David Schaich (he): and within those few seconds this wait to more of passing the Sh under sick. Our limits emits amount of energy. That's
David Schaich (he): something like 5 billiontimes right.
David Schaich (he): The energy released by our some in that same time scale.
David Schaich (he): So this particular type of a supernova is not the only one.
David Schaich (he): Why is on the degeneracy pressure? I'll be low temperature.
David Schaich (he): You have some fermionic electrons to occur.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): it has to you
David Schaich (he): well. in fact, that it's based on state accretion of mass
David Schaich (he): counteracting balanced volume that degeneracy pressure
David Schaich (he): leads to
David Schaich (he): a very large amount of
David Schaich (he): regularity among all of these
David Schaich (he): type one a supernovae, all these binary systems that is very useful for
David Schaich (he): astrophysical and cosmological analysis. It provides something that's called stand your candle
David Schaich (he): Supernova proceeds in roughly the same way
David Schaich (he): in all these different cases. even for stars that are
David Schaich (he): many times older than others.
David Schaich (he): So if we look out at these type one a supernovas and
David Schaich (he): measure their brightness.
David Schaich (he): We can know that they all started roughly with the same like this when they went off, and what we see
David Schaich (he): the modern age is you signed in on it. How far away they are for that brightness you have reduced to the amount that reaches the earth. how far away they are
David Schaich (he): after the light from
David Schaich (he): their supernova explosion reaches us. If we feed that into the
David Schaich (he): speed of light, we can tell how long ago they exploded.
David Schaich (he): So what these standard candles Hello! Able to
David Schaich (he): provide cosmologists? Once a map of
David Schaich (he): how far away these stars were at various points in time, going back
David Schaich (he): billions of years.
David Schaich (he): some measures of distance as a function of time
David Schaich (he): which actually much to
David Schaich (he): most businesses, surprise. sure that
David Schaich (he): the expansion
David Schaich (he): of the universe is actually getting faster.
David Schaich (he): Universes expansion is accelerating. probably over the past hundreds of millions or millions of years. This was discovered by looking at these type one a super node in
David Schaich (he): Cv. No, no prize in physics little over a decade ago. but it was very much contrary to what most scientists were expecting
David Schaich (he): at the time the observations were carried out, they assume that the universe was expanding, either with the
David Schaich (he): a constant speed, and for more likely they thought it was being pulled
David Schaich (he): back together to
David Schaich (he): smaller sizes, thanks to the amount of mass that it contains
David Schaich (he): which produces gravitation traction.
David Schaich (he): this result from type, one a supernova.
David Schaich (he): The degeneracy pressure we've computed actually showed that there is
David Schaich (he): some phenomenon that is
David Schaich (he): using the gravitational repulsion.
David Schaich (he): This is commonly called dark energy, though
David Schaich (he): that is a term for it, because energy actually causes gravitational fraction
David Schaich (he): rather than repulsion. The ultimate cause of this one of the chief mystery is that several folks here in theoretical physics department are
David Schaich (he): researching.
David Schaich (he): but that is.
you know.
David Schaich (he): to you set about fight for supernovas and dark energy. Are there any questions about
David Schaich (he): that or any other aspects of
David Schaich (he): you low temperature for me on gas before you turn to something completely different.
David Schaich (he): Yes. so at this point there is a
David Schaich (he): some value in an exercise that rings together the to
David Schaich (he): autumn gaps as we've looked at so far all through relativistic photons and
David Schaich (he): download this stick.
David Schaich (he): Those
David Schaich (he): consider the case of it.
David Schaich (he): optimistic for me on this
David Schaich (he): particular ideal gas. Of those. an example of all the basic fermions are particles known as neutrinos. This will exhibit some features of the normalistic premium gas
David Schaich (he): on in particular, with the occupation numbers of these
David Schaich (he): ultimately for the ons, as well as some features of
David Schaich (he): realistic pose up gas and photons.
David Schaich (he): That is any natural next topic to consider it
David Schaich (he): as is
David Schaich (he): something that has been sort of advertised several times throughout the day. I'm sure
David Schaich (he): corrections to that low temperature limits some more systematic expansions and powers
David Schaich (he): of the low temperature compared to the fermi energy or chemical potential. both of those not going to go through live.
David Schaich (he): That will be the
David Schaich (he): I, because the Pencasts I have planned.
David Schaich (he): and instead.
David Schaich (he): I want to make sure that the lectures themselves give you wonderful opportunity to. I consider, ask questions about.
David Schaich (he): not ideal.
David Schaich (he): some of the dynamic systems that involved direct interactions
David Schaich (he): between the degrees of freedom.
David Schaich (he): So we only have time today to
David Schaich (he): motivate this. and
David Schaich (he): there are a few parts to that motivation. First, the question of why
David Schaich (he): we have not talked about this up until now. with the end of the term.
David Schaich (he): and also the question of why we are talking about it now. So we
David Schaich (he): so far
David Schaich (he): very good physical predictions.
David Schaich (he): How many do you know?
David Schaich (he): Not interacting ideal systems?
David Schaich (he): So that was I just like to like spectrum the
David Schaich (he): what we'll look at on this tutorial on Thursday?
David Schaich (he): It's the heat capacity, for
David Schaich (he): it was everyday medals that just came up.
David Schaich (he): But
David Schaich (he): it's not the tracking systems. All are insufficient to describe everything
David Schaich (he): of interest in one particular set of No, no.
David Schaich (he): that they generally fail to describe very well or at all. I know it has
David Schaich (he): these transitions.
David Schaich (he): which are. it's familiar from
David Schaich (he): every day experience things like the liquid gas phase transition that we can induce by more than you can with water. The point that
David Schaich (he): I never go to a
David Schaich (he): transition co existence of liquid gas.
David Schaich (he): wireless team
David Schaich (he): and many other examples of this that
David Schaich (he): well begin to get into tomorrow.
David Schaich (he): And the reason we yeah. not going into these interacting systems so far I talked about uses and these transitions. It's just that.
David Schaich (he): Once we introduce interactions you will see that
David Schaich (he): the systems become very quickly, very much harder. Analyze mathematically.
David Schaich (he): In general
David Schaich (he): there will not be any close form solution of this with that we central module Oops bye. just for me.
David Schaich (he): You spend their module arriving things like the I
small
David Schaich (he): the heat capacity for curious
David Schaich (he): dynamic systems.
David Schaich (he): Once the interactions are turned on. we won't be able to get. but it's sort of the close for predictions, or even
David Schaich (he): very good approximations
David Schaich (he): based on
David Schaich (he): You know the computations by hand. much
David Schaich (he): ongoing research, and all these statistical physics. For this reason why
David Schaich (he): numerical computer calculations. in order to analyze these sorts of interacting systems
David Schaich (he): have a bit of a taste of that from looking at
David Schaich (he): the random walks that come from
David Schaich (he): the country. Lorentz distribution, for which the me and the standard deviation are not defined. Interactions take us into a
David Schaich (he): similar situation.
Okay.
David Schaich (he): no. actually broader landscape, all of the possible phenomena
David Schaich (he): and possible systems to consider.
David Schaich (he): We are out of time to again those considerations today. Motivation looking forward. Oh. wrap it up there.
David Schaich (he): Let you go off to the rest of your day.
David Schaich (he): and tomorrow we will actually find what we mean by interacting and all interacting systems, and begin to see
David Schaich (he): how to deal with
David Schaich (he): a more complicated case. Some of the
David Schaich (he): more interesting behavior that it will allow us to consider it any final questions before you wrap up for today.
David Schaich (he): not seeing any all
David Schaich (he): shut things down, and that it once you go on.